---
title: "Thoughts on Rust Foundation Transition"
date: 2021-02-08T13:50:35-07:00
draft: false
tags: ["rust", "mozilla", "open-source"]
---

To begin, I have been a Rust user since Fall 2015, I believe v0.7. I may have a nostalgic connection, given my adoption occured during a transitional period in my education. It served as a main tool in many of my early academic efforts, adding a layer of intruige to my work. To see it progress has been a pleasure.

There is no shortage of musings about the advantages and disadvantages of Rust especially presented as comparrisons with other languages. I think Rust serves a unique purpose, where many efforts to compare with other next-gen languages may be useful as an elementary mechanism but with any depth are unfounded. Rust provides a variety of novel mechanisms. Foremost of which, variable lifetimes and the subsequent ownership paradigm ensure memory and thread safety. The importance of these constructs can not be overstated, Google purported half of the [security bugs addressed in 2019](https://opensource.googleblog.com/2021/02/google-joins-rust-foundation.html) were memory safety issues. With all this packaged providing comparable perforamcne with the C/C++ suite, it is unsurprising we are seeing critical components being rewritten / implemented in Rust.

Recently, Mozilla restructured their efforts, laying off a non-trivial number of employees. As a result, they have discontinued their loose affiliation as the mangerial role of Rust. I think this is a real shame, the company has a long track record of selfless efforts aimed at improving computing across myriad domains. Examples include the annual [Internet Health Report](https://foundation.mozilla.org/en/insights/internet-health-report/) and their recent [Committment to Climate](https://blog.mozilla.org/blog/2021/01/21/mozillas-climate-commitments/) efforts. The Rust ecosystem is indebted to Mozilla's nurturing efforts.

However, I think the recently formed [Rust Foundation](https://foundation.rust-lang.org/) is a transition in the right direction. In my understanding there are representatives from a number of large companies that are heavily invested in Rust (and developing improvements themselves) in addition to developers from the core Rust team. In my experience, languages driven by a single entity face multi-faceted issues. Simply, a community driven effort produces better results. It should be surprising that Rust, under the guise of Mozilla management, seemed to forego these issues. But the guise with which Mozilla managed supported strong consensus-driven decisions. It is my hope that the Rust Foundation serves as a foundational example of succesful open-source project management, where multiple entities collaborate with understanding that the advantages outweight a more greedy development model. Here's to rooting for the continued success along with ideals with which rust was founded.
