---
title: "Password Management with Stash"
date: 2022-04-12T16:52:43-05:00
draft: false

tags: ["100DaysToOffload", "ScriptSeries"]
type: "post"
---

Password management is becoming increasingly important. Best security practices suggest using difficult to remember passwords consisting of either long string of unconnected words or randomized alphanumeric strings. These per-password difficulties are compounded by the increasing number of services brought about by the digitization of everything. While there are certainly efforts the improve this space, they all have specific limitations and the non-emergence of a widely adopted solution tells just how significant these limitations are.

A modern password management solution must:
- Sync across multiple devices: Passwords must be available in a variety of scenarios and environments to be useful.
- Allow mutable secrets: Many services require periodic password updates, this should have first-class support.
- Secure storage and retrieval: What good are secure passwords if you can not trust the central repository to securely store them.
- Present a simple UI: No solution is viable if you can not actually find your passwords.

Stash is a [password management script](https://github.com/hamersaw/scripts/blob/master/stash) in my [scripts repository](https://github.com/hamersaw/scripts). Aligned with my usual design goals - it presents a minimalistic, lightweight application with a simple interface, favoring simplicity over robust functionality. The basic architectural design choices may be summarized as:
- GPG encrypted password file: Data is stored in a single file, which is gpg encrypted. This means to decrypt the data you must posses (1) encrypted password file, (2) gpg private key, and (3) gpg private key password.
- Hierarchical `<key,value>` password definitions: I am a huge fan of simple `<key,value>` stores. I think they provide extensibility and meld well with different use-cases.
- Use commodity linux tooling: Should be deployable as a simple shell script without having to install myriad dependencies.

# Usage

The script usage is quite simple. To begin we will call `help` to show the usage.

```bash
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash help
USAGE: stash COMMAND
COMMAND:
    clip                copy a key's value to the clipboard
    get <key>           retrieve a value for the specified key
    help                display this help menu
    init <gpg-username> initailize the stash repository
    list [subkey]       find all keys containing the specified subkey
    recover             fix system following a failure
    set <key> <value>   store the value for the specified key
    unset <key>         remove values for the key (and all subkeys)
    version             display the applications version
```

Initializing a stash storage file can be performed by calling `init` with the gpg id of the private key to use for encryption. By default the storage location is `$HOME/.local/share/stash` but can be manually configured by setting the `stashdir` ENV variable.

```bash
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash init hamersaw@protonmail.com
```

We can set passwords by using the `set` command. Note that the hierarchical definition uses periods as the delimiter.

```bash
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash set email.google.username foo
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash set email.google.password bar
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash set email.protonmail.username foo
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash set email.protonmail.password baz
```

Listing the available passwords with the `list` command optionally takes a prefix argument. I often combine this with `grep` to easily search my password store. For example:

```bash
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash list email.protonmail
email.protonmail.password
email.protonmail.username
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash list | grep protonmail
email.protonmail.password
email.protonmail.username
```

And calling `get` rather than list will print off both the key and value for each password.

```bash
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash get email.google
email.google.password bar
email.google.username foo
```

Using `clip` uses the `xclip` utility internally to copy the password value to the clipboard without printing it to the screen.

```bash
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash clip email.protonmail.password
```

Unsetting a password can be done using the `unset` command. Note that this works hierarchically, so unsetting `email.google` will unset both the `email.google.username` and `email.google.password` keys.

```bash
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash unset email.google
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash list
email.protonmail.password
email.protonmail.username
```

And finally `recover` is used during failure scenarios. Stash uses a CoW mechanism to ensure that any failure is easily recoverable.

```bash
hamersaw@ragnarok:~$ stash recover
```

This post is part 5 / 5 of the Script Series:
1. [Introduction](/posts/2022.01.14-introducing-script-series)
2. [A Script for Managing Dotfiles](/posts/2022.01.18-a-script-for-managing-dotfiles)
3. [Due: A Kanban TODO List Script](/posts/2022.01.20-due-a-kanban-todo-list-script)
4. [Scripting Your UI Color-Palette](/posts/2022.03.03-scripting-your-ui-color-palette)
5. [**Password Management with Stash**](/posts/2022.04.12-password-management-with-stash)

_11 day(s) offloaded in the [100DaysToOffload](https://100daystooffload.com/) challenge._
